Design Questions

External Instruction

What happens if we change the group size (increase or decrease) to reflect some of the challenges already posed in fraction questions? This would let classes with no common LCM/LCD for one group to develop with a common song, and then if we switch which group has the uncommon group size, for both groups to adjust their construction of sharing the song.
Intro

Sequential Popovers

Settings and Configuration

Should this be a session in and of itself, as testing with 20+ kids will change the experience.
Composition

Is the only way to construct a song by tapping, or can it also be constructed graphically?
Are a "record" and "stop" button needed?
How do we enable constant audio usage of the microphone?
How do we handle the user accidentally clicking no to "allow the webpage to use your microphone?"
If we capture beat intensity during replaying, should we replay it with the same intensity?
Beat intensity aids in analysis of the repetition to identify the down beat and the end of the pattern. This assumes a measure starts with a beat, and not a rest. The analysis can also exist without beat intensity, just requires a different approach. Do we need intensity?
How does beat intensity effect the animation?
What is the minimum beat length?
How does composition differ from editing?
How do we capture the tempo and the beat pattern at the same time?
We should watch for secondary physical movements by the student (whether they are beats or rests) during the composition process, as they have important beat/tempo keeping properties for entrainment.
Could we "apply" a tempo to beat pattern?
Should we predefine the audio length of a beat?
Should the audio length of a beat be defined by the shortest time between two beats in a recorded song?
Should we have a delay and or count down after pressing the record button to allow the user to get ready?
How would we capture the end of a recording session, as to allow for a measure to end with a measure?
Should we have a uniform area that shows a beat is being registered in an addition area of the screen?
Should lowest unit beat also mean the same minimum unit rest and vice-vera?
Could they upload their own song (or url), and have it make a pattern from it?
Could the mic listen to music, and make a pattern from that if the settings are set correctly?
Encourange beat boxing?
Transition

When the current representation lacks or posseses attirbutes of the newer representation, when should the new attributes animate (creation or deletion) occur? before, during, or after?
From audio to other reps: How will the spatial elements of the graphical rep be presented? In reverse, how will the spatial component be eliminated?
Comparison

Do we have students compare their songs for the same assignment? or a base song
Do the students in the groups face changing attributes like the fractional questions we pose to them?
Does comparing a tempo form one song to another benficial? (if it has the same pattern, if it doesn't, if they are complementary: mixed meter)
Collaboration

Allow one User's song to be viewed/forked by other users.
Allow one User's tempos to be applied to another user's songs.
Allow the class to compose a song that meats certain amthematicla principles…
Playback

Animation

Should the animation match the sound of the music, or the spatial characteristic of the beat?
How do we animate the beat when it is played?
How do we animate the tempo? If it is measured in BPM, we could use a metronome-like rep, or instrument pictures If it is measured in DPT, we could have a line that grows and replaces itself

|->    |  |--->  |  |----->| (n)            |  >---|  |    >-|  |      |  (n+1)

|->    |  |--->  |  |----->| (1)            |------|  |------|  |------|  (1)
                                            |->    |  |--->  |  |----->|  (2)
What happens if a beat is played/recorded before the prior beat finishes it's sound and/or animation
Should we allow separation of the playback of audio and animation? and then pose questions:
What would this sound like?
What would this look like?
When we add a beat here… when we delete this sequence/portion… when we increase the tempo by…
Should we allow playback to be either a single playback, repeat n times, or a neverneding loop?
Is there danger in the circular reps of having a vector rep of the tempo before a scalar rep of the linear versions?
Is it important to pause playback and animation to ask questions in between?
If we overlay all same representations (with lower opacity) of different songs, can the student "see" all the different instruments?
Curriculum

If instruction is going to be off screen, is that for every assignment or interaction, or is there going to be a point at which the students begin interacting with the program?
What should a user be presented if they are not logged in?
What should the home page /splash screen include?
When do we allow proper fraction notes (beats whose length are not unit fractions)?
Editing

How does editing differ from composition?
How do we increase/decrease a beat's length?
How do we increase/decrease a measure's length?
Are there other methods of editing other than embodied tapping and graphical manipulation?
During a graphical edit, should the beat have a reference line to its location on the measure? What if there is a conflict?
Can a beat overlap another beat?
Does clicking a beat without moving it delete the beat?
Representations

Component:

Does multiple representations of the same type benefit the student?
Do we separate the measure from the beats?
If we have all instruments colored and shaped the same, could we represent all beats on the same measure representation?
Measure:

Is a measure defined solely from its beats?
If a measure is "at capacity" for the number of beats, what happens if the student adds another beat?
Beat:

Would a beat, when tapped be represented on all represetntations, and should it differ from the audio represntation, showing a beat was "read" by the microphone? Maybe the instrument being static, and being struck?
When adding a beat to the end of a measure, does it lengthen the measure duration, or readjust the spacing of the beats in the measure?

Rest:

Do we graphically repreent a rest?
Does a rest have unit fraction or proper fraction quantity?
Tempo:

Should we represent tempo as BeatsPerMinute or DistancePerTime?
How would we represent tempo as DPT?
pixels per second? or pixels per n seconds? a growing line?
Do we allow different tempos?
How do we adjust tempo?
Audio:

This representation has a minimalist graphic representation for spatialy conceptualizing the music
How do we ask a student to identify a specific beat, given that beats are presented chronologically, with no spatial representation?
Bead:

Group:

Number Line:

How should the demarcations look? esp for each beat or measure?
Should we allow for range changing of the labels?
Pie:

Linear Bar:

Radial:

Implementation Questions

Intro

Sequential Popovers
Settings and Configuration
Should this be a session in and of itself, as testing with 20+ kids will change the experience.
Composition

Setting the threshold for the analysis timeout while recording the tempo
Transition

Comparison

Collaboration

Rails 4 vs Socet IO integration with 3
Playback

Curriculum

Editing

Representations

