ICAT Request for Proposals (RFP)
Please refer to the RFP attachment on the specific funding webpage (www.icat.vt.edu/funding). 
For more information or for any questions, please contact Lisa Jansen (ljansen@vt.edu).
* Required

Select which ICAT grant you are applying for: *
  $500 Student Grant
 $3,000 Mini Grant
 $25,000 Major Grant

Project Title *
Sound Of Fractions
 
Principal Investigator (PI) *
You will be the contact person for this project and all associated communications will be directed to you
Chris Frisina

PI E-mail address *
 special@vt.edu

PI Home Department Name *
CS
 
PI Home Department Org Code *
004100

Team Member(s) *
List each member on a new line with Name, Dpeartment, and E-mail address
 Deborah Tatar    CS  dtatar@cs.vt.edu
 Steve Harrison   CS  srh@cs.vt.edu

Faculty Advisor, Department Head/Chair, or Center Director *
List each member on a new line with Name, Department, and E-mail address
 Deborah Tatar    CS  dtatar@cs.vt.edu
 
Research Areas *
Select a minimum of two research areas that best represent the research areas the project involves:
 Architecture
*Behavioral Sciences
 Business
 Design
 Education
*Engineering
*Computer Science
 Human Science
 Humanities
*Music
 Performing Arts
 Social Sciences

Project Description *
Describe the significance, specific aims, methods, assessment
  Students can struggle in particular academic areas, while excelling in others. Fractions in early mathematics often pose the largest and longest lasting hindrance for future progression in mathematics and abstract thinking. Music is appreciated by students and provides students opportunities to skillfully produce music themselves. Importantly, musical theory has many features that are relatable to features in mathematical language. We utilize interest in music as a motivating feature for a new socio-technical approach to teaching fractions. The Sound of Fractions (SoF) incorporates three key ideas: (1) working with both the whole and the part at the same time is crucial in learning fractions, (2) drumming is a compelling, embodied, culturally-relevant activity that allows students to experience the parts, whole, and the relationships between them, and (3) by creating a new representational infrastructure, we can create viable, classroom based activities that bridge between percussion-related activities and mathematics-related activities.

  A crucial element in this is the transition from students tapping on their desks to tapping their own musical rhythms into the laptop microphone. We provide considerable audio processing to isolate and identify the intended rhythm.  Our current strategy works well for small groups; however, we cannot dampen the audio sufficiently to prevent feedback when there are many performers in a space without proper audio design (as in a classroom). We have informally tested a Makey Makey alternative input device to capture the tapping when recording music.  It appears to provides an excellent interaction, allowing the students to perform their musical rhythm easily while the computer captures distinct, individual signals. 

  We will use embodied interaction to allow students to create their own musical rhythms that can be represented graphically in the Sound of Fractions.  We currently allow the students to tap into the microphone on a laptop, and we do beat analysis on the audio signal.  This works great for small groups of two or three, however, when there are many students in a physical space that is not properly audio dampening, noise is a problem for each recording.   We have tested a Makey Makey alternative input device to capture the tapping when recording music.  It provides a perfect plug and play device still allowing the students to perform their musical rhythm while maintaining the signal clarity needed for audio processing.

Statement of Innovation *
Describe what is new, novel, unique about this proposal
  Music and math are thought to be related, but math educators have not tied the two together in a way that allows students to draw upon their similarities to aid math learning. In this project, we utilize selected properties of music, especially those associated with percussion, to engage students with mathematical ideas.  Our focus is on students who have experienced significant problems learning the mathematics of fractions. We have developed the Sound of Fractions to be used as a tool along with a curricular learning progression in teaching fractions to students.  Music allows students to use familiar, embodied concepts and skills.  Music also involves understanding both the whole (the measure) and the part (the beat) at the same time.  To understand fractions as a system also requires perceiving both the whole and the part at the same time. The technology helps with this by tying different modalities (sound and animated motion) together in such as way as to draw the students' attention to the relationship between parts and wholes. We ask students to solve problems at the juncture of music and mathematical patterns. The visual representations they work with become increasingly more similar to standard mathematical representations of fractions.  A crucial factor in the learning progression is the sound patterns are as similar as possible to those that the students create themselves by drumming. They start by drumming patterns on the desk, but the next stage is for them to enter their patterns into the computer.  A key enabler is that when they drum and the computer records, the computer makes correct inferences about the relationship between whole and part, in such a way that the playback still sounds the same to the student.   
 
Describe how your proposal aligns with ICAT goals *
Goals include education, transdisciplinary research, and outreach
  We are interested in teaching students, in particular those being introduced to the concept of fractions along with students with musical skills but have failed to understand the system of fractions. This effort is challenging, both in terms of technical implementation in a form that can be utilized in classrooms and in terms of developing appropriate curriculum. The vision is transdisciplinary in that it draws upon musical performance, mathematical education, computational thinking, and computer science areas to achieve a robust approach.  In particular, our current research shows that those who are most likely to benefit are students with low socioeconomic status, and we have tailored the design and curriculum towards this population.
 
Expertise and experience of investigator(s) *
Describe investigator(s) background and their specific role in the proposal
Chris Frisina:  Chris has had focused research on alternative mathematical education for K-12 students for several years.  His research is fueled by his love for music.  He also is the lead developer for the Sound of Fractions program.
Deborah Tatar:  Dr. Tatar has been studying micro coordination and micro worlds in educational curriculum for many years. Her interests in education have led to the successful development of comprehensive educational tools.
Steve Harrison: Prof. Harrison brings design expertise and an interest in design methods to the project. He also has interests in studying the relationship between communication and technology and how technological representations communicate.  

Detailed project timeline *
Include start / end date, and any milestones.
 Start Date:  Immediately upon grant approval
 Milestones:  Purchase the Makey Makey kits (immediately)
              Order preparation and shipping. (two weeks)
              Run the study in classrooms, museums, and extra-curricular (approx five months).
              Package the kits for donation and loaning, if ICAT would like this. (two weeks)

Specify location(s) where the research will be conducted *
If ICAT space is needed, please provide specifics below as limitations exist on some locations.
We are planning to do studies at Knowledge Works II, along with studies in the field at school locations and other public venues such as museums.

Specify if any technical support will be needed from ICAT *
If ICAT technical support is needed, please describe specifics below.
Technical support is not needed from ICAT.  However, given that the Makey Makeys are not available for rent from anywhere in the country, we would like to donate the kits to ICAT after the research is complete. The kits could be loaned or rented to other organizations at the discretion of ICAT, if ICAT is interested in this approach after the study.  We plan to work with the VT CHCI (Center for Human Computer Interaction) to make this process as beneficial as possible.
 
Describe anticipated external funding which may result from this project *
(i.e., Federal / State / Local government, foundation, and/or industry support)
There is no other external funding for this research endeavor.
 
Budget Request *
Specify the amount of funding you anticipate needing. Funds will be transferred to an E&G fund in the PI's department
$500
 
Budget details by line item & Budget justification *
List line item and amount

30 Makey Makey Kits   $40/unit pricing for 30 kits.   Subtotal: 1200
(this is a confirmed lowest price direct from the manufacturer)
Shipping and Handling $100 (estimated)                Subtotal:  100
                                                         Total: 1300

Current and Pending Funding of the PI(s) *
 There is currently no financial support for the Sound of Fractions at this time.

