Math is about patterns.  We are going to engage in a number of activities that focus on noticing and describing patterns.  Most of our activities are about the underpinnings of fractions, but some of them are about other kinds of patterns. 

Day 1: Familiarity with rhythm, wholes, and associated terminology
  GOAL: Gain familiarity with description terminology for rhythms
        Engagement
        Embodied experience of parts and wholes

  Activity 1
    DO: Play the hook of a popular rhythm for the class
    ASK: Ask the students to describe the rhythm aloud to the teacher and others
      Have the Teacher highlight the main words used that are important for fractions
    TAKEAWAY: Hear main words of students' descriptions

  Activity 2a
    DO: Teacher makes their own representation of the popular beat, but doesn't show it to the students
      For individual student sessions, we can use the same representation

  Activity 2b
    DO: Students to make their own short duration rhythm by tapping on the desk
      Students repeat their rhythm (2-4 times) to make sure they know it well
      Students make their own representation of their rhythm using words, cut paper, color/draw, or manipulatives [Play-doh, blocks]
      Exchange representations and listen to how their rhythm is played by others
    ASK: (Whole class) Was your rhythm the same when the other person played it as when you created it?
      How did it differ?  
      Write it in a journal
    ASK (small group): How could we represent the rhythms differently so that another person could reproduce them?
      Write it in a journal
      What is not helpful?
      [Teacher] reiterates to the students the important words used
 
  Activity 2c
    DO: Students individually come up with new rhythm and modified representations that they then exchange and try to get better replication results.
    ASK:(whole class) What did you discover about how to get another person to play what you wanted them to play?
   
    TAKEAWAY: Ways to represent a rhythm and some of the words people use
    NOTE: When making a representation if a student makes a 'traditional musical' representation, we have them make another

  Activity 3
    DO: Have pairs of students tap one rhythm together, exactly.
        Write what steps you do exactly in your notebook.
    ASK: Are each person's actions equal?
         What do you do to ensure that they are equal?
    DO: Switch rhythms and follow your instructions.
    ASK: Did your process work?
         What didn't work?
         
