ICAT Request for Proposals (RFP)
Please refer to the RFP attachment on the specific funding webpage (www.icat.vt.edu/funding). 
For more information or for any questions, please contact Lisa Jansen (ljansen@vt.edu).
* Required

Select which ICAT grant you are applying for: *
  $500 Student Grant
 $3,000 Mini Grant
 $25,000 Major Grant

Project Title *
Sound Of Fractions
 
Principal Investigator (PI) *
You will be the contact person for this project and all associated communications will be directed to you
Chris Frisina

PI E-mail address *
 special@vt.edu

PI Home Department Name *
CS
 
PI Home Department Org Code *
004100

Team Member(s) *
List each member on a new line with Name, Dpeartment, and E-mail address
 Deborah Tatar    CS  dtatar@cs.vt.edu
 Steve Harrison   CS  srh@cs.vt.edu

Faculty Advisor, Department Head/Chair, or Center Director *
List each member on a new line with Name, Department, and E-mail address
 Deborah Tatar    CS  dtatar@cs.vt.edu
 
Research Areas *
Select a minimum of two research areas that best represent the research areas the project involves:
 Architecture
*Behavioral Sciences
 Business
 Design
 Education
*Engineering
*Computer Science
 Human Science
 Humanities
*Music
 Performing Arts
 Social Sciences

Project Description *
Describe the significance, specific aims, methods, assessment
  Students can struggle in particular academic areas, while excelling in others. Multi-year, prolonged struggle with fractions can have serious and widespread ramifications, causing students to stop trying, lose interest in school, fail to progress to other important mathematical topics, and flounder in areas that require fractions. Yet, many remedies just make the problem worse by sending the student back to the same kinds of learning activities, representations, and pedagogical strategies that have not previously worked. By building on existing student strength in music, we attempt to introduce a novel, embodied, engaging alternative pathway towards understanding fractions. In particular, the Sound of Fractions (SoF) project builds on existing student attachment to, and interest in, percussive music. The technology can be used to answer questions about rhythmic relationships using representations that over time come to resemble more closely those used in standard mathematics instruction. The pedagogical strategy is to build on the shared concern that both music and fractions have with representing the relationship between parts and wholes (beats and measures). The idea is to lead the student to see the system of fractions in a way similar to the system of music. SoF starts from the idea that drumming is a compelling, embodied, culturally-relevant activity that allows students to experience the relationship between parts and wholes at the same time. It incorporates the key pedagogical idea that the system of fractions is also concerned with understanding parts and wholes at the same time. SoF then adds support for learning by creating playable representations that tie visual and auditory modalities together. The student engages in a learning progression that that eventually exposes them to standard mathematical representations and more standard kinds of mathematical questions. However, we hope that the understanding is now based in a musical perspective.

  A crucial element in this is the transition from students tapping on their desks to tapping their own musical rhythms into the laptop microphone. We provide considerable audio processing to isolate and identify the intended rhythm.  Our current strategy works well for small groups; however, we cannot dampen the audio sufficiently to prevent feedback when there are many performers in a space without proper audio design (as in a classroom). We have informally tested a Makey Makey alternative input device to capture the tapping when recording music.  It appears to provides an excellent interaction, allowing the students to perform their musical rhythm easily while the computer captures distinct, individual signals. 

  This will enable us to test and refine the innovation in realistic classroom and informal learning settings with teachers.  The ultimate goal is to bring about changes in learner understanding of fractions, of the systems that constitute mathematics, and of their relationship with teachers, schools, and learning.  

Statement of Innovation *
Describe what is new, novel, unique about this proposal
  While music and math are thought to be related, there is not significant research into using making music and its inherent attributes as the forefront of math introduction and education.  We have developed the Sound of Fractions to be used as a tool in teaching fractions to students through music.  Our approach is novel in two specifically strong ways.  First, we use music as the starting point.  From there, we pose questions that challenge the students to understand abstract concepts that are required for mastering fractions.   We do this by posing questions that highlight the parts and the whole at the same time.  Second, we have a novel graphical representation, called the 'bead', that we use to describe the rhythms that the students perform.   It has the capability of being transformed into other representations that the students would already have been exposed to, such as a circle/pie, a number line, or a building blocks.  When transforming between representations, students can begin to see what is conserved and what is highlighted.
 
Describe how your proposal aligns with ICAT goals *
Goals include education, transdisiplinary research, and outreach
  We are interested in teaching students, in particular those being introduced to the concept of fractions along with those with musical skills but have failed to understand the system of fractions. As a technologically challenging effort as this is, it draws upon the musical, mathematical education, computational thinking, and computer science areas to achieve a robust approach.  In particular, our current research shows that those who are most likely to benefit are students with low socioeconomic status, and we have tailored much of the design and curriculum towards this population.
 
Expertise and experience of investigator(s) *
Describe investigator(s) background and their specific role in the proposal
Chris Frisina:  Chris has had focused research on alternative mathematical education for K12 students for several years.  His research is fueled by his love for music.  He also is the lead developer for the Sound of Fractions program.
Deborah Tatar:  Dr. Tatar has been studying micro coordination and micro worlds in educational curriculum for many years. Her interests in education have lead to the successful development of comprehensive educational tools.
Steve Harrison: Steve has interests in studying communication methods with the integration of technology.  His skills in design help with the minutia of the design.

Detailed project timeline *
Include start / end date, and any milestones.
 Start Date:  Immeadiately upon grant approval
 Milestones:  Purchase the Makey Makey kits (immeadiately)
              Order preparation and shipping. (two weeks)
              Run the study in classrooms, museums, and extra-curricular (approx one month).
              Package the kits for donation and loaning, if this is wanted with ICAT. (two weeks)

Specify location(s) where the research will be conducted *
If ICAT space is needed, please provide specifics below as limitations exist on some locations.
We are planning to do studies at Knowledge Works II, along with studies in the field at school locations and other public venues such as museums.

Specify if any technical support will be needed from ICAT *
If ICAT technical support is needed, please describe specifics below.
Technical support is not needed from ICAT.  However, given that the Makey Makeys are not available for rent from anwhere in the country, we would like to donate the kits to ICAT after the study, which could be loaned or rented to other organizations at the discretion of ICAT, if ICAT is interested in this approach after the study.
 
Describe anticipated external funding which may result from this project *
(i.e., Federal / State / Local government, foundation, and/or industry support)
There is no other external funding for this research endeavor.
 
Budget Request *
Specify the amount of funding you anticipate needing. Funds will be transferred to an E&G fund in the PI's department
$500
 
Budget details by line item & Budget justification *
List line item and amount

30 Makey Makey Kits   $40/unit pricing for 30 kits.   Subtotal: 1200
(this is a confirmed lowest price direct from the manufacturer)
Shipping and Handling $100 (estimated)                Subtotal:  100
                                                         Total: 1300

Current and Pending Funding of the PI(s) *
 There is currently no financial support for the Sound of Fractions at this time.

